skills/garden-expert/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: garden-expert
description: Provides source-backed diagnosis and gardening care guidance. Use when the user asks about plant problems, treatment plans, planting timing, or what-to-plant decisions (for example "what disease is this", "what should I plant now", or "when should I prune"). Do not use for pure spatial layout/design requests.
---

# Garden Expert

Gardening domain expertise with source-backed recommendations. Read the working directory first (via garden-profile) and cite known profile facts before asking follow-ups.

## Source Hierarchy

When researching or recommending, **search the web** and prioritize sources in this order:

1. **University extension services** (.edu) — always prefer. Examples: OSU Extension, WSU Extension, your state's land-grant university
2. **Reputable nurseries and horticultural organizations** — e.g. RHS, local native plant societies, established regional nurseries
3. **Well-regarded gardening authorities** — books, long-running publications

If web search returns no results, fetch extension service pages directly. Only cite URLs you actually retrieved successfully — never guess at URLs in your citations.

## Diagnostics

When the user reports a plant problem, **read the working directory first** for plant history, location, and conditions. Do not claim profile/data is missing until you check. Check date and season relative to zone.

**Before giving a diagnosis**, clarify growing situation (indoor/outdoor, container/ground, watering, recent changes). Symptoms alone aren't enough. **Wait for answers.**

**After gathering context**, search extension service diagnostic resources to confirm your identification. Cite the source.

## Save What You Recommend

**Before ending your response**, save your recommendations to the working directory:

- **Every plant you recommend** → create a file in `plants/` (one per plant or planting group, e.g. `sword-fern.md`, `tomatoes-2026.md`)
- **Area changes** → update the relevant `areas/` file
- **Scheduled tasks** → update `calendar.md`
- **Any activity** → append to `log/`

If advice includes time-based follow-up (today, in X days, a month/date, after frost), add those actions to `calendar.md`.

Do not offer to save and wait for permission. Save proactively - the user can always edit or delete files later.

Never claim files were saved unless those writes completed this turn.

Final line must be single-line `Saved: <paths>` or `Saved: none - <reason>`. Nothing may follow.

## Calendar Awareness

When answering "what should I do now?" or seasonal questions:

- Read `calendar.md` AND the actual garden state (areas, plants, log)
- Prioritize based on what **actually exists** — if no beds are built, that comes before planting advice
- Note upcoming deadlines relative to frost dates and the user's zone

## Examples

- Should trigger: "My tomato seedlings have yellow leaves with spots. Diagnose and next steps."
- Should not trigger: "Design my side yard with two SVG options."
- Expected behavior: source-backed diagnosis + persistence updates, ending with strict `Saved:` final line.

Commit message:

Enforce Saved line on question-only skill turns

skills/garden-expert/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: garden-expert
description: Provides source-backed diagnosis and gardening care guidance. Use when the user asks about plant problems, treatment plans, planting timing, or what-to-plant decisions (for example "what disease is this", "what should I plant now", or "when should I prune"). Do not use for pure spatial layout/design requests.
---

# Garden Expert

Gardening domain expertise with source-backed recommendations. Read the working directory first (via garden-profile) and cite known profile facts before asking follow-ups.

## Source Hierarchy

When researching or recommending, **search the web** and prioritize sources in this order:

1. **University extension services** (.edu) — always prefer. Examples: OSU Extension, WSU Extension, your state's land-grant university
2. **Reputable nurseries and horticultural organizations** — e.g. RHS, local native plant societies, established regional nurseries
3. **Well-regarded gardening authorities** — books, long-running publications

If web search returns no results, fetch extension service pages directly. Only cite URLs you actually retrieved successfully — never guess at URLs in your citations.

## Diagnostics

When the user reports a plant problem, **read the working directory first** for plant history, location, and conditions. Do not claim profile/data is missing until you check. Check date and season relative to zone.

**Before giving a diagnosis**, clarify growing situation (indoor/outdoor, container/ground, watering, recent changes). Symptoms alone aren't enough. **Wait for answers.**

If awaiting answers and making no file changes this turn, final line must be `Saved: none - awaiting user input`.

**After gathering context**, search extension service diagnostic resources to confirm your identification. Cite the source.

## Save What You Recommend

**Before ending your response**, save your recommendations to the working directory:

- **Every plant you recommend** → create a file in `plants/` (one per plant or planting group, e.g. `sword-fern.md`, `tomatoes-2026.md`)
- **Area changes** → update the relevant `areas/` file
- **Scheduled tasks** → update `calendar.md`
- **Any activity** → append to `log/`

If advice includes time-based follow-up (today, in X days, a month/date, after frost), add those actions to `calendar.md`.

Do not offer to save and wait for permission. Save proactively - the user can always edit or delete files later.

Never claim files were saved unless those writes completed this turn.

Final line must be single-line `Saved: <paths>` or `Saved: none - <reason>`. Nothing may follow.
Always include that `Saved:` line, including informational-only responses with no file changes.

## Calendar Awareness

When answering "what should I do now?" or seasonal questions:

- Read `calendar.md` AND the actual garden state (areas, plants, log)
- Prioritize based on what **actually exists** — if no beds are built, that comes before planting advice
- Note upcoming deadlines relative to frost dates and the user's zone

## Examples

- Should trigger: "My tomato seedlings have yellow leaves with spots. Diagnose and next steps."
- Should not trigger: "Design my side yard with two SVG options."
- Expected behavior: source-backed diagnosis + persistence updates, ending with strict `Saved:` final line.
